Recording made on July 2nd 1974
Interview with Mrs. Edminton
Mr. Hagerman
So, there you are. It started as a very informal chat between Jack and myself.
And I've had to carry on ever since. Nobody else seemed to want to take over.
But my greatest problem throughout the years has been getting Welsh recordings.
They're not very plentiful here.
And it has been a problem. Though since my visit to Wales in 1973,
I fortunately was able to obtain some recordings.
And I should mention here that many recordings which were available were not worthy of broadcast.
And CKUA is very, very particular as to the quality.
So unfortunately, some of the discs I had were just not worthy of broadcast.
However, we've worried through. And I'm happy to say that I do get much encouragement.
There are times when I feel it's not quite worth the effort.
And then all of a sudden I either receive mail or telephone calls from the most unexpected places.
And I think it would be of interest for people to know that non-Welsh people seem to be terribly interested in this program.
And for this reason, I do a great deal of research and try to explain the traditions of Wales,
particularly the musical parts such as the gamamba, the ysdewod, noson lawan, and that type of thing.
And of course, I describe the countryside.
And one of my greatest thrills two years ago was to go into a shoe store in Edmonton.
And the clerk said, You must be Mrs. Len Williams. I had never seen the man before.
And I said, Good gracious, how did you know that?
Well, he said, I recognize your voice.
And he said, I'm so glad that I've had this opportunity of speaking with you,
because I'd like you to know that my Canadian-born wife, he was an Englishman, by the way,
insisted that they go to the Llangollen Ysdewod and to the Royal National Ysdewod that particular year.
It was about two or three years ago.
After my explanation of these festivals and describing them.
So there was one instance where I felt it was well worth the effort I put into it.
I've also had some interesting interviews.
A few years back, I had the famous North American American, Welsh American baritone, Thomas L. Thomas.
And he was a delightful person to interview.
He was here in Edmonton having a concert, holding a concert on our Celebrity Series,
which brought all the stars across the continent, really, on the series Celebrity Concerts.
It wasn't in any way connected with the Welsh society.
But I had this interview with Mr. Thomas.
And I also had a very interesting interview with Mr. John Williams Hughes of Maryam Glass, Anglesey,
who is a very distant relative of my husband's and a well-known lecturer in the United States
and well-known in Wales and throughout Britain as a broadcaster and a journalist.
John spent a weekend with us.
And he was one that I also interviewed.
I'm sorry I'm not going to be interviewing you, Glenys.
I do my next program on the 11th of July.
And of course at that time I'll be giving details of the Gammanbagany in Penocha,
which is now becoming quite an institution in Alberta.
We have Gammanbagany in Edmonton each year, usually in the winter over our 1st of March celebrations.
This year we had it on the 28th of April.
And we had Mr. Edwell Parry, our conductor.
He was also an international figure.
He's known in Wales as well as in the United States.
And the annual summer Gammanbagany will be in Penocha in August.
So these are things that are always of interest to broadcast to the people.
And you managed to get over to the Canadian in Edmonton,
a little of the Welsh tradition and the Welsh way of life.
Well, I find that is so.
When I first started, I was absolutely amazed to find that people couldn't believe
that we had a language of our own.
And that we had so many wonderful seats of learning in Wales,
the various colleges, the Aberystwyth and Bangor, and of course the University in Cardiff and so on.
And I was greatly encouraged to go into that angle as well as the music.
Now the program is introduced as the music and tradition of Wales.
So it gives me great scope.
But nevertheless it takes a great deal of research as well.
And I do all the research and the arranging of the programs.
And also commenting. I do the commentaries.
And what more can I say about it now?
How long have you been in Canada?
Well, you're putting me on the spot. I'm certainly going to be dating myself.
I came out here with my mother and my younger sister in 1914.
Our father had come out the year before.
And therefore we rather consider our parents in something of the light of pioneers here.
Certainly Edmonton wasn't the metropolis that it is now.
But you would be interested to know that even then there was a very active Welsh church here.
We had a Welsh minister and it was connected with a Presbyterial in the United States.
And the church flourished until, oh I would say, the early 1920s.
And then it seemed to drift into a society more than the church services.
And the Welsh Society of Edmonton has gone on continuously since then.
We've had our ups and downs with membership.
We hope that we struggle along regardless.
Some years we go along with a very encouraging membership.
And all of a sudden it will dwindle down and then come back again.
So we've been very active this last 10 or 12 years.
And have sponsored the Gordraraan Choir here.
And various concerts of course.
We have a St. David's Welsh male voice choir here.
Though in latter years I'm afraid there are not too many Welsh speaking gentlemen in this group.
But it's a fairly active group here.
And what about the Welsh language?